Standing tall amongst the Infocom’s excellent lineup of text adventure games, a Mind Forever Voyaging is special for being one of the first games to prioritize thematic meaning over its entertainment value. You know, like art does.
You take control of a sentient A.I., Prism, who was made to believe (via a simulated environment) that it was a human being. The shock of the eventual reveal is the transitory moment from the wonderful short story given in a manual (detailing the artificial life of Prism over the course of 18 years of maturation) to the actual gameplay of the program. As with every consciousness, Prism wondered what was the meaning of his life; upon awakening he was told just that: “we made you to help us gather evidence against the current presidents governmental campaign”. Imagine being told – by your creator – that this was the sole purpose of your existence.
When designing this game, Steve Meretzky wanted to deliver a razor-sharp political statement regarding the Ronald Reagan administration, specifically, its outlined long-term plan for changes to US internal politics. What he, unintentionally, created, is one of the most fascinating meta-textual, post-modern works I’d ever seen. It reminds me of the film I saw recently: “The Big Heat”. If you take its story literally – it’s a fairly bland, run-over-the-mill story… However, when you start to deconstruct it, think about it in terms of logos, rather than pathos, you realize that it’s deeper than you thought. AMFV is like that, only twenty times more. The author was so passionate about his game, that it became far greater than he had originally envisioned. Far deeper and smarter than he could ever consciously design. Just like how the professor in the game wanted to create A.I. to help tarnish the name of a President… but managed to create a being with a soul.
There’s too much to this game that I’d like to analyze one day (in fact, I did, but just need to make a video about it), but for now let’s just say: when playing this game, focus on your own feelings and thoughts, rather than try to figure out what the author wanted to say.