Just like how 3D games struggle with platforming, 2D ones struggle with shooting. The idea of the latter is ranged combat. “Duh”, you might say, but hold on, give me a second. What ranged combat? We’re talking about a sidescroller.  You can see barely anything ahead of you. It’s like imagine playing Doom with Silent Hill 1 fog… only even thicker. That is why shooting was always less fun than platforming in those games... or rather harder to MAKE fun. Because you see: shmups had it figured out. Instead of trying to fix that inherent problem, shmups had weaponized the difficulty. Not a bug – a feature.
The idea of a run & gun game is simple: let’s have a shmup, but instead of a ship – you control a Simon Belmont type character. In terms of gameplay this means restricting movement. Needless to say, this does not make the game easier. In fact, the challenge here IS the appeal… and Contra: Hard Corps embraces this in more than just its title. You have several continues, 3 lives per each, running out of which means restarting the game from the start. You have 8 long missions filled with projectiles, enemies and bosses, each being a one-hit-kill. 99% of players will not reach the end of the first level. 
…On their first try. Because when you try again, you KNOW what’s coming. So you get farther, die, and try again. Again. And again. And again. Pattern memorization is a term familiar to shmup players, but it was never truer than in a Contra game: every jump and duck feels rehearsed and meaningful. If grind and repetition is a sin of game design then Hard Corps is hell. A bullet hell you have to survive without a spaceship to effortlessly move to any pixel of the screen. There is no leeway, no hand-waving, no ease up on you. Pretty much all difficult games only pretend to be difficult, wanting to trick you into believing the grandeur of your success. Not this one. It wants you dead. That’s why beating it feels real. 
That’s where most Contra games stop. Hard Corps is often cited as the best Contra because of its extraordinary variety: 4 different characters each having a unique set of 4 weapons, non-linearity in the already outstanding level-design both in presentation and gameplay. It’s not the true reason it’s the best. The reason this is one of the greatest games is because it understands the philosophy of Contra. This is the only Contra without the iconic code that gives you 29 lives. Most players use it and miss out on what this series was trying to say. Not this time. The only way to paradise is through the 9 circles of hell.
When you have, with blood and tears, reached the end and beaten the final boss of a very difficult game you get a triumphant feeling. It is experienced in a moment and then it’s gone. Hard Corps finds a way to extend this single moment into hours. When you beat a short game with 4 characters and diverse paths, what do you do? You try the others… except you have already learned the patterns. When you replay this game with a different character (so there’s novelty) you discover a very unique type of experience: playing an incredibly well-designed, NOVEL game that 99% of players wouldn’t get passed the first level of… and beating it. Again. And again. And again. And each of those times is a visit to paradise. Paradise you’d earned. 
That is why Contra: Hard Corps is the best one. That’s why this one in particular had to remove the Contra code. It’s because while most shmups become stuck in bullet hell, this one wants you to experience its heaven.