The original game of one of the greatest video game series may not be what players going back to it after later entries might expect: it is nowhere near being the best of its franchise, nor might it be the most “gracefully aged” game of the NES library… But still, I include it here, in the list of the great games.
Firstly, there are some genuinely great design decisions. The structuring of the exploration around the branching semi-open fields with one way leading to incredibly tough enemies, the other in the direction you should go, is a powerful way of conveying RPG progression that often in the 80s RPGs struggled with (looking at Ultima with its “one-fits-all” approach to enemy placement). The dark dungeons you have to illuminate with puny torches I’d found particularly brilliant. I often hear about what a strong impression leaving the Fallout 3 vault left on people playing it back in 2008… well, I was there, and let me tell you that the moment, when I stepped out of the Dragon Quest 1 dungeon and was blasted with full screen of color after an hour of utter blackness, puts it to shame, even though I played DQ1 years after Fallout 3. And yeah, just as this gimmick was starting to get irritating, the game gives you a giant “light” spell that completely negates the darkness issue. That is such a brilliant game design that, honestly, it’s no surprise to see it showcased across this whole simple little game.
This might have sounded condescending, but it’s actually the game’s greatest strength. Unlike the Ultima, Wizardry, Bards Tale and so on, which strived (and often succeeded) in creating monumental, all-engrossing experiences that you had to dedicate equally enormous effort to enjoy, DQ1 is… straight-forward. You have only one character, minimal and rather fun puzzles, a very simple battle system (which, due to magic too subtle to describe here, manages to be engaging despite that), a number of iconic and joyful tunes accompanying the pleasant color-scheme of its appealing tile-based aesthetic and a game, whose primary goal is to grind enough gold to buy next bit of equipment, and you get… A distilled RPG experience, the very core of its level-up and loot-up sensibility. To any RPG fan playing this game will feel like coming back to a home you never knew you had. There is a deep comfort to simply relaxing into its grindy gameplay with its 8-bit visuals and… reconnecting with RPG roots. Celebrating the pureness of what lies at the heart of RPGs. 
Oh… and you also get to carry a princess in your arms across the entire island after defeating a dragon.