This is probably one of the most important games ever made. It also happens to be a game I’m especially biased towards, being one of the dearest to my heart. That’s why I have to be especially harsh with it.
But not today.
This game’s significance is multi-fold. Firstly, it has iterated upon the previous generation of RPGs in a way that I only came to appreciate after doing my years long pilgrimage to the Ultima shrine. Fallout takes the dialogue/quest driven philosophy of Ultima to heart, but expands it in two important ways. First: it finds a way to tie the RPG system to the non-combat oriented mechanics. Ultima RPG system is both laughably minimal and completely separate from the core of experience: dialogues. Fallout’s customization, despite also influencing combat, almost has a greater one on everything outside of it. Your stats alter not just the way you solve quests (which is another Fallout contribution: it standardized the idea of each quest having multiple solutions), but even the way you communicate to NPCs: greater options open up with higher intelligence, greater opportunities with better eloquence skill. Despite being 70% about anything but combat, Fallout manages to give one of the greatest freedoms in terms of making a unique build, improving replayability and role-playing aspect of RPG.
Second: emboldened by the success of Ultima, the developers have really went all out on the dialogue. It’s not just a series of hyperlinked words you click on to prompt a Wikipedia article of a response. The way you ask a question now is equally as important as the question itself. Your demeanor and choice of words means a whole lot. The dialogue tree has been around for a while, but only in Fallout, in my opinion, it has truly started to shine: it’s not just a vehicle of story, but a tool of expressing personality and role-play. In simple terms: Fallout managed to turn dialogues into gameplay and build a whole game around it.
Last, but not least, this games development is important in itself. It’s both painful and inspiring to hear of the difficulty Tim Cain had in creating this game, of how his passion on which he worked afterhours without pay had inspired others to join, how that passion was so overpowering that it even managed to triumph over executives intent on stopping that amount of passionate work being spent on a game they deemed “commercially non viable”. The fact that Fallout came out in spite of everything and that it’s release has made an impact the size of the hole in the “Glow”, becoming one of the renowned “greatest games ever” is a story so monumentally awesome that it alone refills my ever-depleting hope for humanity. 
Upon replaying it two times as separate characters, I had to admit that in terms of quality this game may not live up to both that title and my memories of it, but it’s a great game. Perhaps the greatest of all things Fallout had done was – it made RPGs cool.