New Orleans of SotF is one of the most evocative settings in adventure games. The parks with street performers, like mimes and musicians, the necropolis of a cemetery, forming a whole labyrinth of crypts, the classically gothic architecture of buildings and churches… Even the studio of the protagonist (voiced by Tim Curry himself) feels like such a special, lived in place. It’s fascinating to observe just how far the simple matter of hand-painted background art can go in terms of transporting the player to a whole different time and place.
It’s not just the visuals, of course. Music and the absolutely stellar voice acting (including the frequent patron of video game acting Mark Hammil) add a substantial amount to it as well. But what truly sets this game apart is something that in any other game would be classified as lore. You see, like many truly great cities of the world, New Orleans has cultivated a unique culture of its own that makes it stand apart from other American cities. It’s not Maine, not San Francisco, not Chicago or New York. It is a culture build in equal measure on American colonial legacy and the African Voodoo religion. No other city in US has a history as interwoven with voodoo as New Orleans. It’s a part of its identity. Not the whole of it, mind you. Just a big part of it.
What makes SotF one of the greatest games ever made is the care and passion with which that culture of New Orleans has been captured by its excellent author, Jane Jensen. This game is unimaginable without New Orleans. This city is the soul of it. What is even more impressive is that this was utterly unnecessary: the buildings roman narrative about Gabriel’s spiritual rebirth could have been told in any setting (as proven by the sequel – Beast Within, which is set in a Germanic town). But then Jensen wouldn’t be one of the great storytellers of the medium had she not went and put all this effort put into not just making a great story with great dialogues, but framing it within such a phenomenal… setting? It’s weird calling this city a “setting”. It’s like calling photograph a painting.
Ever since playing this game I was fascinated by New Orleans. I had always wanted to visit, to experience it first-hand… But then a tragedy of hurricane Katrina happened, which had forever altered the face of New Orleans. One of the great values of art is in capturing a time and a place. I’m sure Jensen was not intending for her work to be that, but – through it – the spirit of the old New Orleans lives on, and people ten, a hundred or a thousand years from now will still be able to glimpse the beauty of this special time and place.   