When talking about Gothic 2, people most often bring up its open world. It’s rather small, yet it is, as you might say, hand-crafted. There are no randomly spawned enemies, no randomly generated items… not even a single randomly spawned plant you gather for your alchemical concoctions. Every bit of grass and every tree have been placed here with a deliberate intent. In any open world title there’s a “downtime” as you travel between places of interest. There is no downtime in Gothic 2, because EVERY place is one of interest. In truth, the only reason it’s small is because it doesn’t have anything unnecessary to it. Only with time, after I got over being impressed with game world sizes, I realized that Gothic 2 was always one of the best in the bunch.
But the true reason I maintain this as a great Action/RPG, despite titles like Dark Souls and Skyrim existing, is because…  it’s the truest RPG to date. One of the prime appeals of RPGs is the progression from nothing to the most powerful being in the world. I have not played a single game in which this progression would be handled as well as in Gothic 2. You start as an escaped (and wanted) convict in dirty rags with not a penny to your name. Even if you were to get your hands on a good sword – your inexperienced handling of it would still make killing a single rat a genuine (not like in Fallout 1) challenge. You couldn’t possibly get any lower than that. The simple matter of survival and, I kid you not, finding a job is an ordeal that this game doesn’t neglect. So yeah, in Gothic 2, you don’t start as some chosen one or even a “regular guy”. No. In Gothic 2, you have to WORK YOU WAY UP to becoming a regular guy.
And then you keep on going.
Each step of your progress, each level up and skill upgrade on your way to becoming a warrior capable of defeating dragons and demons one-on-one is viscerally felt. The world, as I’d mentioned, is static – it doesn’t auto-level or adapt to your strength – it exists only to reflect it – to highlight how far you’d come from being at the very bottom of a food chain. Every single aspect of this game is there to cultivate that feeling: from growing your career in a chosen faction to how your priorities change from making a living to living a legend.
There are problems in Gothic 2, a lot of them, but in terms of handling the RPG progression it sets the bar all its own.
