FPS have been, historically, separated into two time periods: before the the release of this game and after. Half-Life changed everything.
It’s not even that it invented something new. Despite overinflated statements by the underinformed criers, nothing within the package of Half-Life is something unseen up until its release. There were FPS with physics (Tresspasser), FPS with narratives and objectives (Dark Forces 1-2), levels connected into a cohesive world (Hexen 1-2, Quake 2), grounded setting (Duke Nukem 3D) and so on. It’s hard to point out something in Half-Life that hasn’t been done in System Shock 1-2 or Unreal (1998). No breakthrough occurs in a vacuum – there’s a build-up first. Then there’s Half-Life.
This game took everything the genre has slowly built and structured it into a package that conveyed to general public that FPS are no longer DOOM clones. That structure is what captivates me the most about it.. Half-Life begins with a tram ride, which may seem perfectly reasonable today, but like something alien to a player at the time of release. Shooters at the time were synonymous with moving at inhuman speed through open environments. Half-life begins by RESTRICTING your movement. After about 3 minutes of such blasphemy, it ALLOWS you to walk. But not shoot. There are NPCs walking around, you navigate environment like a typical DOOM maze, but you can’t do anything about them. You just have to listen to what they say. Absorb the setting. Then the calamity occurs, the plot is set in motion and you are given… not a gun, but a melee weapon that such games typically disregard, so that when you find a pistol, after an hour of play, it feels meaningful. A typical FPS of the time, mind you, would start only here.
Half-life keeps this escalation going at a pace so perfect that this pacing remains, without a doubt, the single greatest artistic achievement of this game as a whole. It is masterfully executed and reaches its peak in the world of Xen. Just like how the opening boldly decided to start the game about an hour BEFORE what would seem normal at the time, the game ends an hour after what would seem a logical end-point… to this day! That is why people tend to dislike Xen – it’s simply too much. I do actually love Xen, but that’s a story for a different time. 
One thing’s for sure: has it not been for that bold opening, with how it grounded the experience in normalcy, making it more relatable, as well as establishing the “Count Zero” coordinate of gameplay progression at a place so low (literal cage with no movement) that EVERYTHING feels like a step up after it (if it started with a pistol it would be the default state, but now – it is something you have worked UP towards), this game would have felt different.
if not for this tram section we wouldn’t consider Half-life to be a narrative breakthrough for FPS that it has been.