Among Oddworld fans there’s a constant debate as to which between this and the original Abe’s Odyssey is the superior title. I fall in the Exodus camp.
That camp typically lists the quality of life updates over the original (standing tall among which is the quicksave feature)… But those are not the reasons why I prefer Exodus over Odyssey. The core appeal of those games is its world and Exodus makes the stunning original look like an impressionist sketch in comparison. What was only outlined is now fully realized. What was implied is now shown. It might sound like a bad thing as it’s better to leave things to imagination rather than spoil the mystery. Fascinating worlds in media are usually akin to a poker player bluffing his way to victory with an empty hand. Exodus, however, avoids that trap entirely, because, when it came to revealing the hand, Oddworld had a full house the entire time. To put it bluntly Exodus has one of the greatest worlds ever coded into a game.   
One thing that bugged me about Odyssey is the final third, the return to Rapture farms: instead of lavishly detailed backgrounds that form the basis of its atmosphere, you get… differently covered fog. Compare that to Exodus: the art deco downtown area serving as a hub on the second disk feels like an actual city, the barracks feel like an actual place where sligs are trained and quartered and the colossal cave filled with bone dust feels… more impactful than anything in the original. Or maybe it’s just me, as I find immeasurable beauty in the way Exodus depicts a grotesque industrial landscape.
It always seemed to me that the reason why the debate between Odyssey and Exodus falls to “nature” vs “industry” is because… only the natural locations of the first game were drawn with the attention to detail that is maintained throughout ALL of Exodus . In this setting, you need both nature and industry to juxtapose each other in the same way you need humour to contrast the inherent darkness of its themes and imagery. This juxtaposition complicates the setting, making it more emotionally diverse and relatable. I deeply disagree with people that claim that Oddworld would be better without humour. It wouldn’t. It’s just way more difficult to explain why a flying exploding fart fits in with an awe-inspiring art deco painting of a background than… anything from the first game.
Odyssey is simpler, easier to digest and appreciate. Exodus is not. 