Phantasy Star games are fascinating to me. The original on Sega Master System had a character driven story with strong world-building and excellent puzzles around the same time Dragon Quest and Final Fantasy were learning how to walk (Phantasy Star 1 is often considered the best JRPG of the 3-rd generation and it’s still underrated: it should have received the laurels Final Fantasy IV got for pushing the medium). More importantly, these games come together like a jigsaw puzzle to form an overarching (and clear) philosophical meaning. 
PS1 told a story of a crisis: a tyrant domineered over the empire. A rebellion of the group of strong-willed people brought him to justice and restored peace among those too weak to do anything about it. It’s not just me being overly mean – talking to NPCs of PS1 you do get the impression that, maybe, the overwhelming technological advances had made the people too complacent, docile. The sequel, set 1000 years after, makes the original sci-fi setting look archaic in comparison. While PS1 only hinted at the weakness, with people still retaining the relatable familiarity to their real-life counterparts, Phantasy Star 2’s inhabitants feel alien. To say that they’d gotten soft in their technological Utopia is an understatement. The overwhelming melancholy of those people could be an argument against Utopia in itself, but the game provides a more convincing one: another crisis.
Just like in the first game, you control a group of selected people – the best of the best, the strongest heroes of the times… but the times are different. The strongest now are nowhere near the level of the legendary heroes of the millennia prior. You see, it’s not just the NPCs that had gotten softer… and  the gameplay reflects that: PS2 is infinitely more difficult than PS1. It’s one of the hardest JRPGs of the 80s. Furthermore, the amount of pain, loss and… defeat the characters of PS2 go through is incomparable to the original. PS2 is not a happy game.
Events of PS2 throw the setting into the dark ages, with Phantasy Star 4, set another 1000 years in the future, becomes least technologically advanced of the three. None of the comfort of PS2 Utopia remains – it’s a post-apocalyptic society with people desperately struggling to survive without having tech to rely upon. Another crisis forces a new group of heroes to yet another journey and… it’s the easiest game in the series. Those people were ready. In fact, for them this crisis is nothing out of the ordinary… which is, again, reflected in the gameplay: it’s a joy to play PS4. Its timeless design compliments the thematic point of the series as a whole, bringing it full circle: characters of PS4 get more joy out of life during a crisis than PS2 ones did during a time of peace. Technology brings comfort, making our lives easier – it sounds like a positive, but, in reality, it couldn’t be farther from the truth. That is why PS2 is not just the most melancholic setting of the series, but also... the least fun to play.
I don’t know if it’s by accident, but decisions like “make the game WORSE to deliver a stronger point” is what auteur art is all about. In fact, Phantasy Star series delivers the most convincing argument against Utopia I had ever seen in either art or philosophy. 
Phantasy Star 2 is the nexus of that thematic crux and it came out in 1989, two years before FFIV and ten before Xenogears.