This is my personal favorite Resident Evil game (and I do mean the original, as in: the version with no auto-aim), which is ironic, since I wouldn’t  even put it in the top 5 of the series’ best. You don’t have to be a rocket scientist to see that this game is plagued with flaws that were ironed out in its superior sequels, not to mention the masterpiece that was crafted out of its image with the 2004 remake. It’s hard for me to explain why, then, it is still my favorite (it wasn’t even my first RE), but the more I think about it, the more I feel that it’s because of the game’s setting.
The Spenser Mansion, where you spend the entirety of the game, is isolated in the woods. It should probably add to the fear/tension, but that would not be an honest description of my feelings. You see, RE, as in, the game as a whole, is itself isolated in a single-minded focus on its location, on the immediacy of the experience. Each room feels like a self-contained world with a unique look and gameplay challenge. It’s simplistic in its nature, straight-forward. Most of the rooms in this game lack the detail of the sequels, retaining a distinct detachment from reality in their presence. It doesn’t look believable or even atmospheric (which is my controversial take for the day – this game completely lacks atmosphere), but it also doesn’t try to be. It is so vividly and unambiguously a video game that it charms you with its honesty. 
The word I’m thinking of is: unpretentious. Unlike any of the rest of the series (including the remake), you can simply chill – drop the façade of “movie-like experience” and methodically, room-by-room go through this quiet mansion filled with rooms too clean and brightly-lit to be horror sets, yet having just enough details (like elaborate patterns of wallpaper or bottles of alcohol and plants in a bar) to not feel like empty asset-flips. There’s a character to those rooms, each so unlike each other, that they barely make coherent sense as parts of the same building. As you backtrack across them throughout the game (more so than in any other RE) you become intimately familiar with them… and that character starts to shine. You grow attached to them in the same way you would to your party members in a JRPG. You stop caring about the lack of atmosphere or believability or coherence and simply lose yourself in the minimalistic experience of an almost escapist quality. 
There’s a magic to this game. It’s a rollercoaster that goes from laughably bad (like the voice acting) to the extraordinarily brilliant (game and level design), but the true heart of it shall always be the Spenser Mansion. 