One of the biggest draws to Shin Megami Tensei series is its unique style. There’s just something lying at the core of this franchise, uniting all its entries: something to which Persona leads a player via its relatable school setting, something to which Digital Devil Saga leads with its relatable characters and their drama, it is that something to which the early entries on Super Famicom were unconsciously grasping, lacking the courage, ability or vision to go all the way. Like how the planets of our Solar System revolve around the Sun, all SMT games revolve around this something.
That something is Nocturne.
To this day this game holds my longest analysis by page count. While most games prioritize gameplay, world or story, this game excels at each and to such a degree that a purely-story/gameplay/world driven game rarely reaches the bar Nocturne had set in all three individually. Holding a master’s degree in literary studies I am not kidding when I say that this game’s story is on par with the deepest books you’d studied at school and outside of it. Its gameplay is infusing the JRPG formula with a degree of thought and engagement that even modern indie RPG makers have yet to match. Just as an example, it has two distinct RPG systems – each having a depth that would shame a normal JRPG’s (or any role-playing game, for that matter) solitary system. Its hyperbolic gothic and grotesque presentation (to be fair, there’s too many styles this game presents to count, like brutalism and high-tech) and surreal nightmarish atmosphere is not only stunning, but also shockingly unique, which is such a rare combination, that this alone is enough to warrant calling this game a masterpiece.
If I am being too vague, I apologize. The truth is that there’s no way to condense the monumental brilliance of this game to 500 words. It took me a long time to properly understand what I saw. This game is, quite frankly, a miracle. On a personal note, the quality of Nocturne is so high that it managed to break through my nostalgic bias towards Final Fantasy and Chrono Trigger. You see, it had always felt wrong to me to denote anything other than one of those two as the greatest of its genre. “At the very least, it should be Persona 4, Earthbound or Dragon Quest 5 or… something!”, my writhing self-denial would exclaim.
I have to stop running away. Shin Megami Tensei: Nocturne is the greatest JRPG I had ever played.