Snatcher was always a bit of an odd-ball for me. It is a game with a great cyberpunk/Blade runner setting, which has not a single bone of originality in its body. It is a story-driven adult visual novel which has quite outlandishly childish… not moments – chunks of the game that are ridiculously juvenile (like the borderline sexist attitude towards women) and the whole story completely falls apart in the third act that was made close to a decade after the first two. One might reasonably ask:”how can I possibly consider this a great game with those being my honest thoughts about its design?” Well… nobody’s perfect. Nobody, however, has quite the touch of Hideo Kojima.
To explain what I mean, let me use my favorite moment in the game –  when a suspect, in act of panic, decides to attack the protagonist. First let me point out that Snatcher begins with a shooting game tutorial that teaches you to unholster your gun with a dedicated “B” button that switches the “mode” of the game to that of a light-gun shooter. Not long after there’s one combat sequence, but after that Snatcher is played entirely through dialogue boxes, being one of the more interactive Visual Novels. You just go through the game relaxed, lulled by the necessity to press each option numerous times to progress: just reading text and pressing “A”, reading and pressing “A”… Hours pass. You guard isn’t just lowered – it has long since checked out and went home… 
… And then BOOM – the door flings open with a guy aiming a gun at you. You are being shot at. Your health depletes. Even though foreshadowed through story, it’s still jarring: the game that asked for nothing but to simply read text suddenly requires you to QUICKLY press that long-forgotten button to even INITIATE the shooting mini-game to defend yourself. To properly get how it feels, imagine watching a movie and then, out of nowhere, the film prompts the viewer to press the “1” button on a remote to shoot a guy that crawled up on John Wick, for example. You might fumble about for couple minutes just LOOKING for the damn remote! That is exactly the feeling of that moment in Snatcher – the EXACT feeling of being caught off-guard in a life or death situation that a scene like that SHOULD provoke. Moments when your life is on the line feel different – they are rare and require decisions that fall into a different set of actions than you do on a day-to-day basis. 
You might argue that it’s different because in life punching or running comes organically, but in the game it doesn’t feel natural to do something you haven’t been conditioned to do. Well, you HAVE been – remember the training mini-game and one actual combat in the very beginning. You HAVE been prepared to press the “B” button in such a scenario, which is why you do just that… but with a moment’s hesitation and a SHOCK akin to being poured with cold water from a basket when you’re cozily reading a book in your comfy chair… and that, you must agree is EXACTLY how such a scene should feel. The whole scene takes about a second, but it stays with you for life. It’s masterfully executed and shows the talent of Hideo Kojima when it comes to game design: even working with such minimal tools as provided by Visual Novel genre, he manages to craft an action moment that hits harder than entirety of 99% of action games released in the decades following his cult classic.
THAT is the touch of Kojima, and that is half the reason this game still retains greatness despite its myriad of problems. The other half is the vivid passion with which the game was made. You can tell Kojima was ecstatic to be working on this – the abandon of joy that the author felt when making a video game equivalent of his favorite movies is not just clearly evident to anyone playing, but also infectious. You might know the feeling you get when talking with someone passionate about a given subject – the joy that radiates from that person is not dissimilar to the joy experienced from interacting with Snatcher. Rarely do you see a game that is made with such an overwhelming level of happiness of its creator… in fact not even any other game of Kojima does. But hey, that only makes Snatcher that much more special.
