This might very well be my favorite FPS. Sure, there are games with better economy systems, gunplay, story, writing, quests, etc. It’s so flawed – you might find it bizarre that I hold it in such high regard. That might be only, if you haven’t played this game yourself. If you had, you’d know.
This is, without a doubt, one of the most atmospheric games ever made. The melancholy, post-apocalyptic feeling of its grey sky and dilapidated land, populated by people in gas masks seating around a campfire, throwing anecdotes and playing guitar, is one that is not soon going to leave anyone, who enters the Zone of  Chernobyl disaster. Walking around its dreary landscape, scavenging supplies among the ruins populated by mutants and anomalies (bizarre occurrences, places where reality “bends”), you can’t help but feel something. I will always remember the shock from when I was talking to a quest-giver on one of my repeat playthroughs and – mid-conversation – he was shot in the head by a passing band of bandits, who decided to raid the camp we were at, completely erasing my ability of ever completing the quest. This was unscripted. The Zone is not here as a backdrop, made for you, the player, to have a fun adventure in. It’s not like that here. The Zone simply is.
In a way this very scene shows why, despite the shortcomings, this game remains one of the greats. In a standard game, the gameplay will always precede the setting. It’s a fundamental flaw to have the game take away a quest from a player on a purely random whim (it’s not even purely random – those bandits weren’t “spawned” there – each NPC in the game travels around the world in real-time). But this is not a game about quests or shoot-outs or whatever. It’s about the Zone. 
There are atmospheric games, there are settings with incredible lore, there are games which simulate worlds and ecosystems (to one degree or another), which have personality… but how many of them truly. Actually. Feel alive? Once again, if you haven’t seen it, it might sound like nonsense. 
But if you had been to the Zone, you’d know.
