One of the prime candidates for the best Mario game (which it is), it’s no wonder that this game needs no introduction… or does it?
When asked for some great 2D platformer games, a beginner will inevitable be recommended this game. This is not a beginner 2D platformer. Sure, for people that grew up with it being one of the only games they had this might sound like a ridiculous statement, but I can speak from experience that – without a considerable experience with the genre – SMW will NOT evoke the feelings it is SUPPOSED to. I know it full well because, when I first played it, I hated it.
The floaty jump makes it too easy to miss an enemy, land next to it and be hit – and in this game you die in one or, if you’re lucky, two hits. Too often this game prompts you to act aggressively ((like when Yoshi starts running off a ledge or a backup powerup starts floating from the top), yet the slippery, momentum-driven controls make it way too easy to accidentally over or undershoot a jump, thus dying while trying to get the stuff to not die. To add salt to injury there are lives and – if you run out – you have to start from the last save. So the experience of someone like me, who was trying to get my feet wet with 2D platformers, was that of constant frustration, annoyance and defeat. I had beaten the game out of spite and the “how can I be a gamer and not beat SMW?”
Ten years have passed. Now I have beaten dozens upon dozens of platformers, liking some of them quite a lot. I felt inspired to give SMW another shot.
I loved every second of it.
Everything that was annoying my inexperienced self became the very thing missing from the platformers I grew accustomed to. Playing Rayman Origins you can basically just hold right and press buttons to the level rhythm and you’ll never die. You can’t do that here: there are moments where you have to pause, time your actions, adjust the jump mid-flight... you have to PLAY to win. The enemy stomp, for instance, requires precision – it’s not a simple matter of just pressing jump in the vicinity of enemy sprite – there’s skill involved.
And that’s the key. You can’t read Ulysses as your first book and expect to get it, let alone enjoy it. You can’t watch Pierrot le Fou as an Avengers followup. It sounds elitist, but there’s no other way about it – it’s just a matter of how hobbies work: there’s a ski slide for beginners and one for those with experience. What’s wrong with there being works of art specifically made for those that got tired of “regular” stuff?
SMW should not be your first platformer. Thankfully, there’s enough without it: Rayman Legends, Super Meat Boy, Mega Man 2 and X, Celeste, Shovel Knight, Sonic the Hedgehog 1-3, hell, even the SMW2 – Any one of these great games would make a better first impression than SMW… But once you had played them and return to SMW you might realize something, or at least I did. 
I have not played a more brilliantly designed platformer in my entire life.
