A classic survival horror game, which is a prime target for the term “outdated” in the video game discourse. I disagree. 
The main criticism for System Shock is its controls – they do not, at all, reflect the modern standard of “walk with WASD and look with mouse”. For a person jumping into it, this becomes an annoyance, as he is now forced to adapt to something unfamiliar, tainting his experience. Not for me. 
There’s a difference between bad controls and unfamiliar ones, which is: no matter how much you play a game with bad controls, you can never get used to them. A game with unfamiliar ones, despite initial resistance, will eventually allow the player to adjust and get the feel of them. The latter is the way with Prince of Persia, Resident Evil… and System Shock. 
Let me tell it straight: it wouldn’t have been one of my favorite games if it didn’t have this control scheme. I’d played hundreds of games which control like, let’s say, the System Shock remake from 2023, but I’d experienced only one which plays like this. And it’s not just the novelty – the controls add to this experience. You are playing as a hacker, who wakes up in a body altered with neural interface that is integrated directly into his brain. The very act of walking and even looking feels unfamiliar to him. The body he inhabits may be humanoid, but the mind is not, which is why he is able to survive aboard the space station with the A.I. gone rogue against all the zombies, cyborgs, mutants, etc. He can fight against them, because, in fact, he is one of them.
The learning process of adapting to the way this new body moves is in complete parallel to how the player has to adapt to this unusual control scheme. Even when you do, the motions of this augmented being will never be as nimble as one of Doom Marine or Duke Nukem (it’s no coincidence I name this a survival horror – one of its staples is limited controls)… but it doesn’t mean it can’t be effective. The absolute control over every aspect of body position and its incline becomes a tool rather than a hindrance. With time, using it becomes second nature... or something even more profound for the hacker that becomes less and less human as he leaves a trail of destruction along his path. Does he feel anything towards the people that worked here? Does he feel remorse when he takes a decapitated head in his hands and uses it to pass a retinal scan, or is it something else – a joy, perhaps, at a “puzzle” solved. When I look at System Shock’s stunning cover art, I don’t see a late game enemy. I see myself.
It pains me to see the public rejoicing at how each new remake and remaster dismisses this core part of what made System Shock one of the great gaming experiences. There’s a lot to love here besides that… but that something is not System Shock. 