Monolith studios is, in my opinion, the overall greatest FPS developer of all time. Blood may not be as good as Doom. Condemned may not be as good as Chronicles of Riddick. No One Lives Forever is not as good as Half-life. F.E.A.R. may not be as good as Half-life 2. In each subcategory of FPS there’s someone like ID or Valve or Starbreeze that specializes in that particular type of FPS, yet no company I can think of has the sheer BREADTH of great games that Monolith does. They are like the Stanley Kubrick of FPS – each game being unlike each other in anything but their greatness.
For Tron 2.0, however, I can’t think of anything off-hand to compare it with. Well… that’s a loaded statement, since it is a part of the Tron franchise, but let me come clean by saying that this game is the best piece of media I’d consumed with a Tron name attached to it. There’s too many good things to count: the stylized visuals with their excellent use of the iconic hyper-neon aesthetic that DUE to how stylized they are haven’t aged a day (seriously, this is one of the most stunning art-directions I’d seen in games, period), the unique gunplay, the surprisingly meaningful RPG elements, even the platforming segments are rather fun.
 But, if I’m being quite honest, the biggest reason I love this game is because I simply enjoy staying in its world. There’s just something authentic about interacting with a Tron universe through a video game. They make the most of it too. Just notice the attention to details: the character names being the files with extensions, the leveling system being stylized as “software iterations” (so 0.0.1 version is level 1) and the familiar to 2D platformer players auto-scrolling section being contextualized with the hard drive being formatted. I’m not exaggerating when I claim that this game has one of the most excellently realized worlds in FPS history, or at the very least one of the most unique.
On a personal note, every once in a while I remember this game existing and it brightens my day a little.
