Whenever I stumble across the inevitable question: “What are the most non-linear, story-driven games you’d played?”, a surprising answer always floats to the top of my mind.
Wing Commander might seem like a bizarre pick, but this game features a campaign each mission of which can be lost… without a game being over. There was a particular mission I simply couldn’t beat, which in another game would mean either suffering from tedious replays until I get lucky or just dropping the game entirely. Not here. At the N-th attempt I decide to turn around, request landing, and end the mission immediately after starting. I get reprimanded by my senior officers, get demoted, my rankings among the crew get lowered (and they seem disappointed in me too) and it all makes me feel somewhat guilty… but, Jesus Christ, that’s what makes this story so effective. It’s yours.
Each triumph and each loss was not scripted – it’s the direct result of your actions. Each of those crewmembers that you can chat with between flights, Mass Effect style, can die on a mission. The course of war, detailed in cutscenes and dialogues, is dependent on your successes. The shocking thing is that it’s not just background: the whole campaign changes based on how well you do. Remember that mission I gave up upon? That decision altered the course of my playthrough – the next mission I got was not the one that someone would get after beating that mission.
The breathtaking non-linearity of a game so story-driven (with characters, narrative and stakes) is so one-of-a-kind here in large part because it proved to be… a failed experiment. Chris Roberts, the designer of WC, lamented the fact of most players missing 80% of missions because they’d simply reload a save after each failed attempt. That’s why the following game was as linear as to script the death of a crewmember in an unavoidable manner. Sure, it allowed for more nuanced drama and the players won’t “miss out” on any missions now… But the magic was gone.
More than the missions and story itself, the true value of such non-linearity was in infusing the gameplay with a sense of “realness” and weight that, I’m certain, you’re used to having evaporated after you learn how little your choices mattered in, pretty much, any other game. I remember hearing Yahtzee Crowshaw, the great game critic, tell of how the funeral scene in WC1 drove his younger self to tears. He’d probably attribute this to his impressionable age, but, you know, something tells me he wouldn’t have told such a story if, instead, he’d played WC2.
