One of the most important games, X-Com has iterated upon Laser Squad (Gallop brothers previous title) in ways so meaningful that decades later a streamlined remake of their masterpiece becomes the most popular game of its genre for yet another decade. 
X-Com is about managing the organization that tries to deal with an alien invasion. You recruit soldiers, research tech (both alien and not), manage the money flow from the governmental sponsorships and, when it inevitably dwindles due to political reasons, black market deals for alien artifacts and bodies… Just don’t ask what they want them for, because we’ve got  far more pressing matters to attend to, like defending another city in Northern Africa from an alien raid. You carefully prepare the team and their equipment, fly your squad out there and… that’s when the true magic happens.
Tension, atmosphere and fear are not typically the words you use to describe a turn-based strategy with. You do not leave from a session of such games with a story so captivating, retelling it to a friend might prompt a question: “Wait, what was the name of that film again?” Each mission is a one-of-a-kind rollercoaster of emotions with each tactical decision you make shaping the emergent narrative in ways only a handful of other games ever managed to match. The remake, ironically, not included. I need to stress the point: the strength of the core gameplay mechanics is so high here that randomized encounters of X-Com feel more brilliantly directed than hand-crafted missions of 99% of games both strategy and otherwise. 
The 2012 remake of X-Com is often regarded as the best and most popular strategy game out there, despite simplifying the gameplay of the original. Simplifying a strategy title is akin to slowing down an action game. Imagine, then, the brilliance of the unrestrained, uncut original when its pale shadow is capable of conquering the world of audiences spoiled by modern games?
Some stars are so bright, I guess, that looking at them might render a person blind.
